## The Reference Counted Smart Pointer `Rc<T>`

In the majority of cases, ownership is very clear: you know exactly which
variable owns a given value. However, this isn't always the case; sometimes,
you may actually need multiple owners. For this, Rust has a type called
`Rc<T>`. Its name is an abbreviation for *reference counting*. Reference
counting means keeping track of the number of references to a value in order to
know if a value is still in use or not. If there are zero references to a
value, we know we can clean up the value without any references becoming
invalid.

To think about this in terms of a real-world scenario, it's like a TV in a
family room. When one person comes in the room to watch TV, they turn it on.
Others can also come in the room and watch the TV. When the last person leaves
the room, they'll turn the TV off since it's no longer being used. If someone
turns off the TV while others are still watching it, though, the people
watching the TV would get mad!

`Rc<T>` is for use when we want to allocate some data on the heap for multiple
parts of our program to read, and we can't determine at compile time which part
of our program using this data will finish using it last. If we knew which part
would finish last, we could make that part the owner of the data and the normal
ownership rules enforced at compile time would kick in.

Note that `Rc<T>` is only for use in single-threaded scenarios; the next
chapter on concurrency will cover how to do reference counting in
multithreaded programs. If you try to use `Rc<T>` with multiple threads,
you'll get a compile-time error.

### Using `Rc<T>` to Share Data

Let's return to our cons list example from Listing 15-4. In Listing 15-8, we're
going to try to use `List<T>` as we defined it using `Box<T>`. First we'll
create one list instance that contains 5 and then 10. Next, we want to create
two more lists: one that starts with 3 and continues on to our first list
containing 5 and 10, then another list that starts with 4 and *also* continues
on to our first list containing 5 and 10. In other words, we want two lists
that both share ownership of the third list, which conceptually will be
something like this:

```text
b -> 3 ---v
a ------> 5 -> 10 -> Nil
c -> 4 ---^
```

Trying to implement this using our definition of `List<T>` with `Box<T>` won't
work:

<figure>
<span class="filename">Filename: src/main.rs</span>

```rust,ignore
enum List<T> {
    Cons(T, Box<List<T>>),
    Nil,
}

use List::{Cons, Nil};

fn main() {
    let a = Cons(5,
        Box::new(Cons(10,
            Box::new(Nil))));
    let b = Cons(3, Box::new(a));
    let c = Cons(4, Box::new(a));
}
```

<figcaption>

Listing 15-8: Having two lists using `Box<T>` that try to share ownership of a
third list won't work

</figcaption>
</figure>

If we compile this, we get this error:

```text
error[E0382]: use of moved value: `a`
  --> src/main.rs:13:30
   |
12 |     let b = Cons(3, Box::new(a));
   |                              - value moved here
13 |     let c = Cons(4, Box::new(a));
   |                              ^ value used here after move
   |
   = note: move occurs because `a` has type `List<i32>`, which does not
   implement the `Copy` trait
```

The `Cons` variants own the data they hold, so when we create the `b` list it
moves `a` to be owned by `b`. Then when we try to use `a` again when creating
`c`, we're not allowed to since `a` has been moved.

We could change the definition of `Cons` to hold references instead, but then
we'd have to specify lifetime parameters and we'd have to construct elements of
a list such that every element lives at least as long as the list itself.
Otherwise, the borrow checker won't even let us compile the code.

Instead, we can change our definition of `List<T>` to use `Rc<T>` instead of
`Box<T>` as shown here in Listing 15-9:

<figure>
<span class="filename">Filename: src/main.rs</span>

```rust
enum List<T> {
    Cons(T, Rc<List<T>>),
    Nil,
}

use List::{Cons, Nil};
use std::rc::Rc;

fn main() {
    let a = Rc::new(Cons(5, Rc::new(Cons(10, Rc::new(Nil)))));
    let b = Cons(3, a.clone());
    let c = Cons(4, a.clone());
}
```

<figcaption>

Listing 15-9: A definition of `List<T>` that uses `Rc<T>`

</figcaption>
</figure>

Note that we need to add a `use` statement for `Rc` because it's not in the
prelude. In `main`, we create the list holding 5 and 10 and store it in a new
`Rc` in `a`. Then when we create `b` and `c`, we call the `clone` method on `a`.

### Cloning an `Rc<T>` Increases the Reference Count

We've seen the `clone` method previously, where we used it for making a
complete copy of some data. With `Rc<T>`, though, it doesn't make a full copy.
`Rc<T>` holds a *reference count*, that is, a count of how many clones exist.
Let's change `main` as shown in Listing 15-10 to have an inner scope around
where we create `c`, and to print out the results of the `Rc::strong_count`
associated function at various points. `Rc::strong_count` returns the reference
count of the `Rc` value we pass to it, and we'll talk about why this function
is named `strong_count` in the section later in this chapter about preventing
reference cycles.

<figure>
<span class="filename">Filename: src/main.rs</span>

```rust
# enum List<T> {
#     Cons(T, Rc<List<T>>),
#     Nil,
# }
#
# use List::{Cons, Nil};
# use std::rc::Rc;
#
fn main() {
    let a = Rc::new(Cons(5, Rc::new(Cons(10, Rc::new(Nil)))));
    println!("rc = {}", Rc::strong_count(&a));
    let b = Cons(3, a.clone());
    println!("rc after creating b = {}", Rc::strong_count(&a));
    {
        let c = Cons(4, a.clone());
        println!("rc after creating c = {}", Rc::strong_count(&a));
    }
    println!("rc after c goes out of scope = {}", Rc::strong_count(&a));
}
```

<figcaption>

Listing 15-10: Printing out the reference count

</figcaption>
</figure>

This will print out:

```text
rc = 1
rc after creating b = 2
rc after creating c = 3
rc after c goes out of scope = 2
```

We're able to see that `a` has an initial reference count of one. Then each
time we call `clone`, the count goes up by one. When `c` goes out of scope, the
count is decreased by one, which happens in the implementation of the `Drop`
trait for `Rc<T>`. What we can't see in this example is that when `b` and then
`a` go out of scope at the end of `main`, the count of references to the list
containing 5 and 10 is then 0, and the list is dropped. This strategy lets us
have multiple owners, as the count will ensure that the value remains valid as
long as any of the owners still exist.

In the beginning of this section, we said that `Rc<T>` only allows you to share
data for multiple parts of your program to read through immutable references to
the `T` value the `Rc<T>` contains. If `Rc<T>` let us have a mutable reference,
we'd run into the problem that the borrowing rules disallow that we discussed
in Chapter 4: two mutable borrows to the same place can cause data races and
inconsistencies. But mutating data is very useful! In the next section, we'll
discuss the interior mutability pattern and the `RefCell<T>` type that we can
use in conjunction with an `Rc<T>` to work with this restriction on
immutability.
