## TODO: Section Title

Back in Chapter 16, we saw an example of counting up on multiple threads. Given
that threads allow us to implement a form of concurrency, we might expect that
async APIs can substitute fairly directly for the threading APIs. The `trpl`
crate supplies a `spawn_task` function which looks very similar to the
`thread::spawn` API, and a `sleep` function which is an async version of the
`thread::sleep` API. We can use these together to implement the same counting
example as with threads.

To start, we will set up our `main` function with `trpl::block_on`:

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-TODO-01/src/main.rs:block_on}}
```

Then we can write two loops within that block, each with a `trpl::sleep` call in
them. Similar to the threading example, we put one in the body of a
`trpl::spawn_task`, just like we did with `thread::spawn`, and the other in a
top-level `for` loop. Notice that we also need to add a `.await` after the
`sleep` calls.

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-TODO-01/src/main.rs:task}}
```

Putting that all together, we end up with the code in Listing 17-TODO:

<Listing number="17-TODO" caption="Showing how we might implement two counters with `async` instead of threads" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-TODO-01/src/main.rs:all}}
```

</Listing>

This does something very similar to what the thread-base implementation did, as
we can see from the output when we run it:

```text
hi number 1 from the second task!
hi number 1 from the first task!
hi number 2 from the first task!
hi number 2 from the second task!
hi number 3 from the first task!
hi number 3 from the second task!
hi number 4 from the first task!
hi number 4 from the second task!
hi number 5 from the first task!
```

Just like with the threading example, you may see a different order in your own
terminal output when you run this. And, just like the threading example, if you
want to run all the way to the completion of the first task, you will need to
use a join handle to wait for the first task to complete. With threads, we used
the `join` method to “block” until the thread was done running. Here, we can use
`await` to do the same thing:

<Listing number="17-TODO" caption="Using `.await` with a join handle to run a task to completion" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-TODO-02/src/main.rs}}
```

</Listing>

Now the output again looks like what we saw in the threading example.

```text
hi number 1 from the second task!
hi number 1 from the first task!
hi number 2 from the first task!
hi number 2 from the second task!
hi number 3 from the first task!
hi number 3 from the second task!
hi number 4 from the first task!
hi number 4 from the second task!
hi number 5 from the first task!
hi number 6 from the first task!
hi number 7 from the first task!
hi number 8 from the first task!
hi number 9 from the first task!
```

So far, it looks like async and threads basically give us the same basic
behavior. However, there are a few important differences already. One was using
`.await` instead of calling `join` on the join handle. Another is that we needed
to await both `sleep` calls. Most importantly, though, we did not need to spawn
another operating system thread to do this. We were able to get concurrency for
just the cost of a task, which has much faster startup time and uses much less
memory than an OS thread.

<!-- TODO: discuss tasks vs. threads more *here*? -->

What is more, we actually do not need the `spawn_task` call at all to get
concurrency here. Remember that each async block compiles to an anonymous
future. That means we can put each of these two loops in an async block and then
ask the runtime to run them both to completion using `trpl::join`:

<Listing number="17-TODO" caption="Using `trpl::join` to await two anonymous futures" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-TODO-03/src/main.rs}}
```

</Listing>

When we run this, we see both futures run to completion:

```text
hi number 1 from the first task!
hi number 1 from the second task!
hi number 2 from the first task!
hi number 2 from the second task!
hi number 3 from the first task!
hi number 3 from the second task!
hi number 4 from the first task!
hi number 4 from the second task!
hi number 5 from the first task!
hi number 6 from the first task!
hi number 7 from the first task!
hi number 8 from the first task!
hi number 9 from the first task!
```

Here, at least with the implementation we are using in `trpl`, you will see the
exact same order every time, which is very different from what we saw with
threads. That is because the `trpl::join` function is *fair*, meaning it checks
both futures at an equal rate. With threads, the operating system decides which
thread to check, and that is ultimately out of our control. With an async
runtime, the runtime itself decides which future to check, so it has the final
say. In practice, the details get complicated because an async runtime might use
operating system threads under the hood as part of how it manages concurrency,
but a well-designed runtime can still guarantee fairness.

Try combining different places to await the futures and see what they do. See if you can figure out what the output will be *before* running the code!

* Remove the async block from around either or both of the loops.
* Await each async block immediately after defining it.
* Wrap only the first loop in an async block, and await the resulting future
  after the body of second loop.
