# Foreword

The Rust programming language has come a long way in a few short years, from
its creation and incubation by a small and nascent community of enthusiasts, to
becoming one of the most loved and in-demand programming languages in the
world. Looking back, it was inevitable that the power and promise of Rust would
turn heads and gain a foothold in systems programming. What was not inevitable
was the global growth in interest and innovation that permeated through open
source communities and catalyzed wide-scale adoption across industries.

At this point in time, it is easy to point to the wonderful features that Rust
has to offer to explain this explosion in interest and adoption. Who doesn’t
want memory safety, *and* fast performance, *and* a friendly compiler, *and*
great tooling, among a host of other wonderful features? The Rust language you
see today combines years of research in systems programming with the practical
wisdom of a vibrant and passionate community. This language was designed with
purpose and crafted with care, offering developers a tool that makes it easier
to write safe, fast, and reliable code.

But what makes Rust truly special is its roots in empowering you, the user, to
achieve your goals. This is a language that wants you to succeed, and the
principle of empowerment runs through the core of the community that builds,
maintains, and advocates for this language. Since the previous edition of this
definitive text, Rust has further developed into a truly global and trusted
language. The Rust Project is now robustly supported by the Rust Foundation,
which also invests in key initiatives to ensure that Rust is secure, stable,
and sustainable.

This edition of *The Rust Programming Language* is a comprehensive update,
reflecting the language’s evolution over the years and providing valuable new
information. But it is not just a guide to syntax and libraries—it’s an
invitation to join a community that values quality, performance, and thoughtful
design. Whether you’re a seasoned developer looking to explore Rust for the
first time or an experienced Rustacean looking to refine your skills, this
edition offers something for everyone.

The Rust journey has been one of collaboration, learning, and iteration. The
growth of the language and its ecosystem is a direct reflection of the vibrant,
diverse community behind it. The contributions of thousands of developers, from
core language designers to casual contributors, are what make Rust such a
unique and powerful tool. By picking up this book, you’re not just learning a
new programming language—you’re joining a movement to make software better,
safer, and more enjoyable to work with.

Welcome to the Rust community!

- Bec Rumbul, Executive Director of the Rust Foundation
